Adding the full version (#2)
ruvdrsti/reports: content/report_RHF.tex

\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:intro}
This report will discuss the notebook we made on restricted Hartree-Fock theory.
We will walk trough the notebook step by step and discuss what we see there. 
The same titles as in the notebook will be used, as to make sure the report can be 
easily followed. Relevant parts of the code will be displayed.

 \section{Theoretical Approach}
 \label{sec:theory}
 \subsection{Introduction to Theory}
 \label{subsec:intro}
 Before we actually dive into the code, we will discuss the theory behind it.
 The actual goal of this experiment is to calculate the energy of a molecule,
 mainly to solve the Schrödinger equation for that molecule. This, unfortunately,
 is impossible. So we have to find an alternative. This alternative would be
Hartree-Fock theory. Bluntly put we can define another operator, the Fock operator,
that consists of one-electron operators and two-electron operators. This is 
displayed in Equation \ref{eq: fock matrix}. 

\begin{equation}\label{eq: fock matrix}

>     \hat{f}(1) = \hat{h}(1) + 2\sum_i^{N/2}\hat{J}_i - \sum_i^{N/2}\hat{K}_i

Reviewer: Keep in mind that this definition is only valid in the restricted closed shell scheme, but nevertheless correct for this report.

\end{equation}

>  J is the Coulomb operator, it accounts for the interelectronic repulsion. K is 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 $\hat{J}$ is the Coulomb operator, it accounts for the interelectronic repulsion. $\hat{K}$ is 

```

 exchange operator, that accounts for the stabilizing interaction between 
 electrons that have the same spin. 
 \subsection{Deriving the Fock Operator}
 \label{subsec:fock matrix}
Let us step back a bit here to see where this operator comes from. To do that, we 
need to begin with the true Hamiltonian for the system, which is given in Equation 
\ref{eq:hamilthe}
\begin{equation}\label{eq:hamilthe}

>     \hat{\boldsymbol{H}} = \sum_i^N\hat{h}(i) + \frac{1}{2}\sum_i^N\sum_j^N\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_i - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \hat{H} = \sum_i^N\hat{h}(i) + \frac{1}{2}\sum_i^N\sum_j^N\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_i - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}

```
Bold symbols are reserved for vectors and matrices, operators are per convention not bold.

\end{equation}
$\hat{h}(i)$ is a one electron operator containing the potential energy of
electron $i$ with respect to the nucleus and the kinetic energy of electron $i$.
The second term accounts for interelectronic interactions. Now we also need a
wavefunction $\Psi$, which is a Slater determinant. This determinant looks like
Equation \ref{eq:slater}.
\begin{equation}\label{eq:slater}

>     \Psi = 1/\sqrt{N!}\begin{vmatrix}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \ket{\Psi} = 1/\sqrt{N!}\begin{vmatrix}

```
To be consistent with your later expectation value.

        \chi_1(\boldsymbol{x}_1) & \cdots & \chi_n(\boldsymbol{x}_1) \\
        \cdots & \cdots & \cdots \\
        \chi_1(\boldsymbol{x}_n) & \cdots & \chi_n(\boldsymbol{x}_n)\\
    \end{vmatrix}
\end{equation}

> When we look at the individual functions $\chi_i(x_j)$ we can state Equation 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we look at the individual functions $\chi_i(\boldsymbol{x}_j)$ we can state Equation 

```

\ref{eq:spinor}

\begin{equation}\label{eq:spinor}

>     \chi_i(x_j) = \psi_i(\boldsymbol{x}_j)\gamma(\boldsymbol{\omega}_j)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \chi_i(\boldsymbol{x}_j) = \psi_i(\boldsymbol{r}_j)\gamma(\boldsymbol{\omega}_j)

```
**x** stands for all the variables, so inside you spatial part you better go to **r** for example

\end{equation}
Here $\psi$ is a spatial orbital, $\gamma$ is a spin function, which can be either
$\alpha$ or $\beta$. Now we have all the ingredients, we can start building the Fock
matrix. The first step would be to calculate the expectation value of the 
Hamiltonian over the wave function $\Psi$. First of all we assert that all spin-orbitals
are normalised, so that $\braket{\chi_i}{\chi_i} = 1$. We will not give the exact 
derivation here, but jump straight to the end result. This is given in Equation 
\ref{eq:expect}.

\begin{multline}\label{eq:expect} 

>     \bra{\Psi}\hat{\boldsymbol{H}}\ket{\Psi} = \sum_i^N\bra{\chi_i}\hat{h}(1)\ket{\chi_i} + \frac{1}{2}\sum_i^N\sum_j^N\left(\int\chi_i^*(1)\chi_i(1)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_i- \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\chi_j^*(2)\chi_j(2)d1d2 \right.\\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \bra{\Psi}\hat{H}\ket{\Psi} = \sum_i^N\bra{\chi_i}\hat{h}(1)\ket{\chi_i} + \frac{1}{2}\sum_i^N\sum_j^N\left(\int\chi_i^*(1)\chi_i(1)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_i- \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\chi_j^*(2)\chi_j(2)d1d2 \right.\\

```
Have a look into _split_ and some commands in the physics package, to write this more easily

     \left. - \int\chi_i^*(1)\chi_j(1)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_i - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\chi_j^*(2)\chi_i(2)d1d2\right)
\end{multline}

> This expectation value can always be calculated, even if $\Psi$ is not an eigenfucntion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This expectation value can always be calculated, even if $\Psi$ is not an eigenfunction

```

of the Hamiltonian. The only problem we have here is the choice of the spin-orbitals.
We need to choose them in such a way that the energy is minimal. This would mean
that the energy is a stationary point, so we enforce Equation \ref{eq:condition}.  
\begin{equation}\label{eq:condition}
    E(\chi_i + \delta\chi_i) - E(\chi_i) =\delta E = 0
\end{equation}

> E is off course nothing else then the expectation value of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
E is of course nothing else than the expectation value of the

```

> wave function $\Psi$ over the Hamiltonian. We could write $\bra{\Psi}\hat{\boldsymbol{H}}\ket{\Psi} = E(\chi_i)$. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
wave function $\Psi$ over the Hamiltonian. We could write $\bra{\Psi}\hat{H}\ket{\Psi} = E(\chi_i)$. 

```

> Now we will enforce orthonormality of the spin-orbitals via a seperate function, as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we will enforce orthonormality of the spin-orbitals via a separate function, as

```

These equations are called the Hartree Fock equations.
\subsection{Restricted Hartree-Fock}
\label{subsec:RHF}
As we said in the last subsection, we are not quite where we want to be just yet.
We need to get to the Fock matrix from Equation \ref{eq: fock matrix}, but we are
only at the one in \ref{eq:fockeqpreq}. This is where we will make the jump to
restricted Hartree Fock theory. To start, we will take a look at Equation \ref{eq:spinor}.
Here we saw that the spin-orbital is actually a product of a spatial orbital and
a spin function. When we take a look at our operators however, we notice that none
of them will actually interact with this spin function. We would then like to get rid
of it. Doing this is actually not that difficult. If we would collect all functions
that have $\alpha$ as their spin component, we can write a Hartree-Fock equation and
then simply integrate the spin component out by adding $\bra{\alpha}$ on every
side of the equation. For the one electron part and the coulomb operators, there is
no problem at all, since all electrons stay in their respective orbitals. However,
the exchange operator will move electrons around to different spin-orbitals.(see 

> Equation \ref{eq:exchange}) When the electron from an $alpha$ spin-orbital would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Equation \ref{eq:exchange}) When the electron from an $\alpha$ spin-orbital would

```

> be moved to a $beta$ spin-orbital, this would result in a zero, since $\bra{\alpha}\ket{\beta} = 0$

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be moved to a $\beta$ spin-orbital, this would result in a zero, since $\bra{\alpha}\ket{\beta} = 0$

```

> be moved to a $beta$ spin-orbital, this would result in a zero, since $\bra{\alpha}\ket{\beta} = 0$

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be moved to a $beta$ spin-orbital, this would result in a zero, since $\bra{\alpha}\ket{\beta} = 0$.

```

So here it is clear that the exchange operator will only remain active after spin 
elimination between electrons that have the same spin function. So now that we have
gotten rid of spin, all that is left is Equation \ref{eq:spinelim}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:spinelim}
    \hat{f}^{\alpha}(1)\psi^{\alpha}_i = \epsilon^{\alpha}_i\psi^{\alpha}_i
\end{equation}
Off course the same argument stands for the $\beta$-spins.

Now we have come to a point where we can define a restricted closed shell system.
Imagine what would happen if all orbitals were doubly occupied, with an $\alpha$
and a $\beta$ electron, all according to the Pauli princple. This has some consequences.
The first one is that the amount of $\alpha$-electrons would equal the amount of
$\beta$-electrons. Secondly, this would mean that the difference between these electrons
is only their spin function. They reside in the same orbitals. This means that we only
need to account for half the electrons, since the other half is in the same orbitals,
just with a different spin. Now think about the Fock operator. Let us

> take a look at a single electron. It has a one election hamiltonian, electronic repulsion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
take a look at a single electron. It has a one electron hamiltonian, electronic repulsion

```

for all other electrons in the system and it only "exchanges" with half of the other

> electrons, only those with the same spin. This means we have a double the amount of 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
electrons, only those with the same spin. This means we have double the amount of 

```

coulomb operators to exchange operators. When we now look back at Equation \ref{eq: fock matrix},
we see that we are finally there.

\subsection{Application of the Hartree-Fock Theory}
\label{subsec:applic}
At this point, we might think back to the point where we defined the coulomb and
exchange operators. These operators themselves depend on the orbitals. So we would
need to know the orbitals to define our operator. It seems we are stuck again.
However we can apply some mathemathical tricks to get us out of this impasse. 
First we can assert that every function can be expressed as a linear combination
of basis functions. We also know that the eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator
form such a set of basis functions. We begin by selecting a convenient basis set.
This could be a set of atomic orbitals. Then we would solve the eigenproblem in
Equation \ref{eq:eigenproblem}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:eigenproblem}

>     \boldsymbol{\hat{H}}^{core}\boldsymbol{C} = \boldsymbol{SC}c

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    \boldsymbol{H}^{core}\boldsymbol{C} = \boldsymbol{SC}c

```
This is a matrix equation now, H^core is the matrix representation of the core hamiltonian operator.

\end{equation} 
Calculating the eigenvalues and eigenfunctions for the core Hamiltonian is 
perfectly possible, since it is a one-electron operator. We now have a set of 
orbitals which we can use to build our Fock operator. For this Fock operator, 
we can solve the generalised eigenproblem in the form of the Roothaan-Hall 
equations (see Equation \ref{eq:Roothaan-Hall}).

\begin{equation}\label{eq:Roothaan-Hall}
    \boldsymbol{FC} = \boldsymbol{SC}\epsilon
\end{equation}

Solving this equation will give us a set of eigenfunctions of the Fock matrix. 
These functions can then be used to build a new Fock matrix. This is where we 
start the iterations. We can continue untill we reach a point where the energy 
does not change any more. At that point, we have found the energy of the molecule.

Before we move on, some clarifications are in order. 
\begin{enumerate}

>     \item The basis set we choose is not the same as the set that is derived

Reviewer: This block is not entirely accurate, but i admit that my comment on the previous version was maybe not entirely clear as well. Better delete this block for now and ask me in office about it. You can then decide to add a modified version again.

    from the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian. These eigenfunctions are in fact
    our first guess of the actual molecular orbitals. However, this guess will not be

>     very good yet, since off course the core Hamiltonian is not the same as the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    very good yet, since of course the core Hamiltonian is not the same as the 

```

    molecular Hamiltonian. 
    \item A basis set is often chosen for the ease of integration. Often, these
    are Gaussian functions. So we can see that the chosen basis set does not
    need to have the same properties as the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian. 

>     Off course the functions do have to be "well-behaved". The size however, will always be the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Of course the functions do have to be "well-behaved". The size however, will always be the same.

```

    In most cases this would actually mean that it is infinitely large, so of no
    real use to us. However, if we choose an incomplete set, we will only be able
    to make approximations.
    \item If we want to do the expansion, we need to integrate the spin out first.
    So we need to end up with an expansion that is only dependent on the spacial
    orbital, like in Equation \ref{eq:expansion}.
    \begin{equation}\label{eq:expansion}
        \psi_i = \sum_jC_{ji}\phi_j
    \end{equation}
\end{enumerate}

\subsection{The Density Matrix}
\label{subsec:theDM}
At this point we still need to adress one topic, the density matrix. This will be
very important since it will be used to calculate the Fock matrix in our program.
To demonstrate what it is, we will look at the expression for the Coulomb operator.
When we take Equation \ref{eq:coulomb} and then expand the functions $\chi_i$ in
a basis after eliminating the spin, we find Equation \ref{eq:coulombexp}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:coulombexp}
    \hat{J}_i = \int\sum_{\sigma}C^*_{\sigma}\phi^*_{\sigma}(x_j)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_1 - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\sum_{\nu}C_{\nu}\phi_{\nu}(x_j)dx_j
\end{equation}

> The C factors in this equation are merely the exapansion coeficcients of the function

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The C factors in this equation are merely the expansion coefficients of the function

```

> $\psi_i$.(Rememmber that this is the spatial orbital, see Equation \ref{eq:spinor})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$\psi_i$.(Remember that this is the spatial orbital, see Equation \ref{eq:spinor})

```

These are constans, so we can safely extract them from the integrals to form
Equation \ref{eq:coulombexp1}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:coulombexp1}
    \hat{J}_i = \sum_{\sigma}\sum_{\nu}C_{\nu j}C^*_{\sigma j}\int\phi^*_{\sigma}(x_j)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_1 - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\phi_{\nu}(x_j)dx_j
\end{equation}
We can apply this same strategy to the exchange operator. In the end we will be

> able to factor out the products of the expansion coëficcients and afer summation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
able to factor out the products of the expansion coeficcients and afer summation

```

> able to factor out the products of the expansion coëficcients and afer summation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
able to factor out the products of the expansion coefficients and afer summation

```

over all basis functions we can define the density matrix as Equation 
\ref{eq:densitymatrix}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:densitymatrix}

>     D_{\sigma\nu} = 2\sum^{N/2}_jC_{\sigma j}^*C_{\nu j}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    D_{\sigma\nu} = 2\sum^{N/2}_jC_{\sigma j}C_{\nu j}^*

```
In (almost) all sources the C matrix of the second index gets the conjugate, however this is a little arbitrary.

\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:intro}
This report will discuss the notebook we made on restricted Hartree-Fock theory.
We will walk trough the notebook step by step and discuss what we see there. 
The same titles as in the notebook will be used, as to make sure the report can be 
easily followed. Relevant parts of the code will be displayed.

 \section{Theoretical Approach}
 \label{sec:theory}
 \subsection{Introduction to Theory}
 \label{subsec:intro}
 Before we actually dive into the code, we will discuss the theory behind it.
 The actual goal of this experiment is to calculate the energy of a molecule,
 mainly to solve the Schrödinger equation for that molecule. This, unfortunately,

>  is impossible. So we have to find an alternative. This alternative would be

Reviewer 3: Why is it impossible?

\begin{multline}\label{eq:expect} 
    \bra{\Psi}\hat{\boldsymbol{H}}\ket{\Psi} = \sum_i^N\bra{\chi_i}\hat{h}(1)\ket{\chi_i} + \frac{1}{2}\sum_i^N\sum_j^N\left(\int\chi_i^*(1)\chi_i(1)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_i- \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\chi_j^*(2)\chi_j(2)d1d2 \right.\\
     \left. - \int\chi_i^*(1)\chi_j(1)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_i - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\chi_j^*(2)\chi_i(2)d1d2\right)
\end{multline}
This expectation value can always be calculated, even if $\Psi$ is not an eigenfucntion
of the Hamiltonian. The only problem we have here is the choice of the spin-orbitals.
We need to choose them in such a way that the energy is minimal. This would mean
that the energy is a stationary point, so we enforce Equation \ref{eq:condition}.  
\begin{equation}\label{eq:condition}
    E(\chi_i + \delta\chi_i) - E(\chi_i) =\delta E = 0
\end{equation}
E is off course nothing else then the expectation value of the
wave function $\Psi$ over the Hamiltonian. We could write $\bra{\Psi}\hat{\boldsymbol{H}}\ket{\Psi} = E(\chi_i)$. 
Now we will enforce orthonormality of the spin-orbitals via a seperate function, as
can be seen in Equation \ref{eq:lagrange}.
\begin{equation}\label{eq:lagrange}

>     L = E - \sum_{ij}\epsilon_{ij}(\braket{\chi_i}{\chi_j} - \delta_{ij})

Reviewer 3: Can you explain in a sentence or two what the symbol `L` signifies?

take a look at a single electron. It has a one election hamiltonian, electronic repulsion
for all other electrons in the system and it only "exchanges" with half of the other
electrons, only those with the same spin. This means we have double the amount of 

Coulomb operators to exchange operators. When we now look back at Equation \ref{eq: fock matrix},
we see that we are finally there.

\subsection{Application of the Hartree-Fock Theory}
\label{subsec:applic}
At this point, we might think back to the point where we defined the Coulomb and
exchange operators. These operators themselves depend on the orbitals. So we would
need to know the orbitals to define our operator. It seems we are stuck again.
However we can apply some mathemathical tricks to get us out of this impasse. 
First we can assert that every function can be expressed as a linear combination
of basis functions. We also know that the eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator
form such a set of basis functions. We begin by selecting a convenient basis set.
This could be a set of atomic orbitals. Then we would solve the eigenproblem in
Equation \ref{eq:eigenproblem}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:eigenproblem}

>     \boldsymbol{\hat{H}}^{core}\boldsymbol{C} = \boldsymbol{SC}c

Reviewer 3: This is more of a general comment, but each equation should have all of its symbols explained in the surrounding text.

>  The same titles will be used, so you can follow along easily. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 The same titles as in the notebook will be used, as to make sure the report can easily be followed. 

```

 Relevant parts of the code will be displayed.

 \section{Theoretical Approach}
 \label{sec:theory}
 Before we actually dive into the code, we will discuss the theory behind it.
 The actual goal of this experiment is to calculate the energy of a molecule,
 mainly to solve the Schrödinger equation for that molecule. This, unfortunatly,
 is impossible. So we have to find an alternative. This alternative would be

> Hartree-Fock theory. Bluntly put we can define another operator, the Fock operator,

Reviewer: This is very bluntly put indeed. The Fock operator does not appear out of thin air. Try to elaborate on where it comes from. Try to describe what the Hartree-Fock approximation is really about. You don't have to derive the whole thing of course, but now your cutting the corners a little too much.

that consists of one-electron operators and two-electron operators. This is 

> displayed in Equation \ref{eq: fock matrix}. 

Reviewer: You used the equation label probably twice, as the reference is wrong.

\begin{equation}\label{eq: fock matrix}
    \hat{f}(1) = \hat{h}(1) + 2\sum_i^{N/2}\hat{J}_i - \sum_i^{N/2}\hat{K}_i
\end{equation}
 J is the Coulomb operator, it accounts for the interelectronic repulsion. K is 
 exchange operator, that accounts for the stabilizing interaction between 
 electrons that have the same spin. Please do keep in mind that Equation

>  \ref{eq: fock matrix} only holds for restricted closed shell systems, where the

Reviewer: Be careful, restricted closed shell systems have an additional condition besides the number of alpha and beta electrons being the same.

 amount of alpha-electrons equals the amount of beta-electrons. Now let us look

>  at the way these operators are defined. This is shown in Equations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 at the way these operators are defined. This is shown in Equations \eqref{eq:coulomb} and \eqref{exchange}

```

 \begin{equation}\label{eq:coulomb}
    \hat{J}_i\chi_a(x_1) = \int\chi_i^*(x_j)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_1 - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\chi_i(x_j)dx_j\chi_a(x_1)
 \end{equation}

 \begin{equation}\label{eq:exchange}
     \hat{K}_i\chi_a(x_1) = \int\chi_i^*(x_j)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_1 - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\chi_a(x_j)dx_j\chi_i(x_1)
 \end{equation}

> The point here is the operators themselves depend on the orbitals. So we would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The point here is that the operators themselves depend on the orbitals. So we would

```

need to know the orbitals to define our operator. It seems we are stuck again.

> However we can apply some mathemathical tricks to get us out of this impasse. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, we can apply some mathemathical tricks to get us out of this impasse. 

```

First we can assert that every function can be expressed as a linear combination

> of basis functions. We also know that the eigenfunctions of a Hermitian operator

Reviewer: Has the basis set you use here (STO-3G, CC-PVDZ...) the same properties as the basis set provided by the hamiltonian eigenfunctions?

1. Are they the same size?
2. Have they the same properties?

Additionally, you can indeed expand a function in a basis, but what is the main "problem" in this approach?

> from such a set of basis functions. We begin by selecting a convenient basis set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
form such a set of basis functions. We begin by selecting a convenient basis set.

```

This could be a set of atomic orbitals. Then we would solve the eigenproblem in
Equation \ref{eq:eigenproblem}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:eigenproblem}
    \boldsymbol{\hat{H}}^{core}\boldsymbol{C} = \boldsymbol{SC}c
\end{equation} 
Calculating the eigenvalues and eigenfucntions for the core Hamiltonian is 
perfectly possible, since it is a one-electron operator. We now have a set of 
orbitals which we can use to build our Fock operator. For this Fock operator, 
we can solve the generalised eigenproblem in the form of the Roothaan-Hall 
equations (see Equation \ref{eq:Roothaan-Hall}).

\begin{equation}\label{eq:Roothaan-Hall}
    \boldsymbol{FC} = \boldsymbol{SC}\epsilon
\end{equation}

Solving this equation will give us a set of eigenfunctions of the Fock matrix. 
These functions can then be used to build a new Fock matrix. This is where we 
start the iterations. We can continue untill we reach a point where the energy 

> does not change any more. At that point, we have found the energy of the molecule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
does not change anymore. At that point, we have found the energy of the molecule.

```

At this point we still need to adress one topic, the density matrix. This will be
very important since it will be used to calculate the Fock matrix in our program.
To demonstrate what it is, we will look at the expression for the coulomb operator.
When we take Equation \ref{eq:coulomb} and then expand the functions $\chi_i$ in
a basis we find Equation \ref{eq:coulombexp}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:coulombexp}
    \hat{J}_i = \int\sum_{\sigma}C^*_{\sigma}\phi^*_{\sigma}(x_j)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_1 - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\sum_{\nu}C_{\nu}\phi_{\nu}(x_j)dx_j
\end{equation}

> The C factors in this equation are merely the exapansion coëficcients of the function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The C factors in this equation are merely the expansion coefficients of the function

```

$\chi_i$. These are constans, so we can safely extract them from the integrals to form
Equation \ref{eq:coulombexp1}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:coulombexp1}

>     \hat{J}_i = \sum_{\sigma}\sum_{\nu}C_{\nu j}C^*_{\sigma j}\int\phi^*_{\sigma}(x_j)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_1 - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\phi_{\nu}(x_j)dx_j

Reviewer: You have to be careful. In earlier equations as well as here you are mixing between the coulomb operator before and after integrating out spin dependency. Revise these equations and adapt them accordingly. Maybe include a short text about integrating out spin as well.

\end{equation}
We can apply this same strategy to the exchange operator. In the end we will be
able to factor out the products of the expansion coëficcients and afer summation
over all basis functions we can define the density matrix as Equation 
\ref{eq:densitymatrix}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:densitymatrix}

>     D_{\sigma\nu} = 2\sum^{N/2}_jC_{\sigma j}^*C_{\nu j}

Reviewer: This is a correct definition. However, have a look at your function `getDensityMatrix()`, this is not entirely consistent with your definition here. In real HF this won't be a problem, but for generality you best add something.

\end{equation}
This will be used to calculate the Fock matrix. (see below)

> \section{Identifying the Molecule}

Reviewer: In your text under this listing, you forgot a verb (I cannot change that directly).

\end{equation}
 J is the Coulomb operator, it accounts for the interelectronic repulsion. K is 
 exchange operator, that accounts for the stabilizing interaction between 
 electrons that have the same spin. 
 \subsection{Deriving the Fock Operator}
 \label{subsec:fock matrix}
Let us step back a bit here to see where this operator comes from. To do that, we 
need to begin with the true Hamiltonian for the system, which is given in Equation 
\ref{eq:hamilthe}
\begin{equation}\label{eq:hamilthe}
    \hat{\boldsymbol{H}} = \sum_i^N\hat{h}(i) + \frac{1}{2}\sum_i^N\sum_j^N\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_i - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}
\end{equation}
$\hat{h}(i)$ is a one electron operator containing the potential energy of
electron $i$ with respect to the nucleus and the kinetic energy of electron $i$.

> The second term accounts for interelectronic interactions. Now we also need a

Reviewer 4: Now,*

wavefunction $\Psi$, which is a Slater determinant. This determinant looks like
Equation \ref{eq:slater}.
\begin{equation}\label{eq:slater}
    \Psi = 1/\sqrt{N!}\begin{vmatrix}
        \chi_1(\boldsymbol{x}_1) & \cdots & \chi_n(\boldsymbol{x}_1) \\
        \cdots & \cdots & \cdots \\
        \chi_1(\boldsymbol{x}_n) & \cdots & \chi_n(\boldsymbol{x}_n)\\
    \end{vmatrix}
\end{equation}
When we look at the individual functions $\chi_i(x_j)$ we can state Equation 
\ref{eq:spinor}

\begin{equation}\label{eq:spinor}
    \chi_i(x_j) = \psi_i(\boldsymbol{x}_j)\gamma(\boldsymbol{\omega}_j)
\end{equation}

> Here $\psi$ is a spatial orbital, $\gamma$ is a spin function, which can be either

Reviewer 4: Here,*

of the Hamiltonian. The only problem we have here is the choice of the spin-orbitals.
We need to choose them in such a way that the energy is minimal. This would mean
that the energy is a stationary point, so we enforce Equation \ref{eq:condition}.  
\begin{equation}\label{eq:condition}
    E(\chi_i + \delta\chi_i) - E(\chi_i) =\delta E = 0
\end{equation}
E is off course nothing else then the expectation value of the
wave function $\Psi$ over the Hamiltonian. We could write $\bra{\Psi}\hat{\boldsymbol{H}}\ket{\Psi} = E(\chi_i)$. 
Now we will enforce orthonormality of the spin-orbitals via a seperate function, as
can be seen in Equation \ref{eq:lagrange}.
\begin{equation}\label{eq:lagrange}
    L = E - \sum_{ij}\epsilon_{ij}(\braket{\chi_i}{\chi_j} - \delta_{ij})
\end{equation}
Now we will calculate $\delta L$, this is possible with the information that is given.
We will once again skip to the end. The final equation is given in Equation \ref{eq:deltaL}.
\begin{equation}\label{eq:deltaL}
    \delta L = \sum_i\bra{\delta\chi_i}\hat{h}(1) + \sum_j(\hat{J_j} - \hat{K_j})\ket{\chi_i} -  \sum_{ij}\epsilon_{ij}\braket{\delta\chi_i}{\chi_j} + complex\:conjugate = 0
\end{equation}

> We have added the coulomb and exchange operators. When we define the expectation

Reviewer 4: Coulomb*

we are not quite there yet. However we can already write some interesting equations
with the formulas we have. We can write Equation \ref{eq:fockeq}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:fockeq}
    \hat{f}(1)\chi_i = \epsilon_i\chi_i
\end{equation}
These equations are called the Hartree Fock equations.
\subsection{Restricted Hartree-Fock}
\label{subsec:RHF}
As we said in the last subsection, we are not quite where we want to be just yet.
We need to get to the Fock matrix from Equation \ref{eq: fock matrix}, but we are
only at the one in \ref{eq:fockeqpreq}. This is where we will make the jump to
restricted Hartree Fock theory. To start, we will take a look at Equation \ref{eq:spinor}.
Here we saw that the spin-orbital is actually a product of a spatial orbital and
a spin function. When we take a look at our operators however, we notice that none
of them will actually interact with this spin function. We would then like to get rid
of it. Doing this is actually not that difficult. If we would collect all functions
that have $\alpha$ as their spin component, we can write a Hartree-Fock equation and
then simply integrate the spin component out by adding $\bra{\alpha}$ on every

> side of the equation. For the one electron part and the coulomb operators, there is

Reviewer 4: Same as above.

gotten rid of spin, all that is left is Equation \ref{eq:spinelim}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:spinelim}
    \hat{f}^{\alpha}(1)\psi^{\alpha}_i = \epsilon^{\alpha}_i\psi^{\alpha}_i
\end{equation}
Off course the same argument stands for the $\beta$-spins.

Now we have come to a point where we can define a restricted closed shell system.
Imagine what would happen if all orbitals were doubly occupied, with an $\alpha$
and a $\beta$ electron, all according to the Pauli princple. This has some consequences.
The first one is that the amount of $\alpha$-electrons would equal the amount of
$\beta$-electrons. Secondly, this would mean that the difference between these electrons
is only their spin function. They reside in the same orbitals. This means that we only
need to account for half the electrons, since the other half is in the same orbitals,
just with a different spin. Now think about the Fock operator. Let us
take a look at a single electron. It has a one election hamiltonian, electronic repulsion
for all other electrons in the system and it only "exchanges" with half of the other
electrons, only those with the same spin. This means we have a double the amount of 

> coulomb operators to exchange operators. When we now look back at Equation \ref{eq: fock matrix},

Reviewer 4: Same typo.

    our first guess of the actual molecular orbitals. However, this guess will not be
    very good yet, since off course the core Hamiltonian is not the same as the 
    molecular Hamiltonian. 
    \item A basis set is often chosen for the ease of integration. Often, these
    are Gaussian functions. So we can see that the chosen basis set does not
    need to have the same properties as the eigenfunctions of the Hamiltonian. 
    Off course the functions do have to be "well-behaved". The size however, will always be the same.
    If you choose a basis set with only two functions, your Hamiltonian will have only
    two eigenfunctions. The bigger the basis set, the more eigenfunctions you will have. 
    \item We are using an expansion of a function in a basis. That is always possible.
    However, there is always a catch, namely that the basis set used has to be complete.
    In most cases this would actually mean that it is infinitely large, so of no
    real use to us. However, if we choose an incomplete set, we will only be able
    to make approximations.
    \item If we want to do the expansion, we need to integrate the spin out first.

>     So we need to end up with an expansion that is only dependant on the spacial

Reviewer 4: dependent*

    orbital, like in Equation \ref{eq:expansion}.
    \begin{equation}\label{eq:expansion}
        \psi_i = \sum_jC_{ji}\phi_j
    \end{equation}
\end{enumerate}

\subsection{The Density Matrix}
\label{subsec:theDM}
At this point we still need to adress one topic, the density matrix. This will be
very important since it will be used to calculate the Fock matrix in our program.
To demonstrate what it is, we will look at the expression for the coulomb operator.
When we take Equation \ref{eq:coulomb} and then expand the functions $\chi_i$ in
a basis after eliminating the spin, we find Equation \ref{eq:coulombexp}.

\begin{equation}\label{eq:coulombexp}
    \hat{J}_i = \int\sum_{\sigma}C^*_{\sigma}\phi^*_{\sigma}(x_j)\frac{1}{|\boldsymbol{r}_1 - \boldsymbol{r}_j|}\sum_{\nu}C_{\nu}\phi_{\nu}(x_j)dx_j
\end{equation}

The C factors in this equation are merely the exapansion coëficcients of the function
$\psi_i$.(Rememmber that this is the spatial orbital, see Equation \ref{eq:spinor})

> These are constans, so we can safely extract them from the integrals to form

Reviewer 4: constants*

repulsion matrix and the Hamiltonian , which the molecule object calls with the 
methods seen in Section \ref{sec:step2}. Since the density matrix depends on the 
current \pythoninline{self.guessMatrix}, the Fock matrix will also depend on it. 
We will discuss the importance of this in \ref{subsec: iteration}. 

 
 \section{The SCF Energy}
 \label{sec:step5}

>  From the Fock matrix we derived in the previous section, we can now calculate the electronic energy acoording to Equation \eqref{eq:energy}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 From the Fock matrix we derived in the previous section, we can now calculate the electronic energy according to Equation \eqref{eq:energy}.

```

\end{python}
  

> In Listing \ref{ls:Listing 1} we define the \pythoninline{__innit__} method of the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Listing \ref{ls:Listing 1} we define the \pythoninline{__init__} method of the 

```

In this section, we do some prerequisite calculations. These are relatively 
straightforward. In this step, we added some methods to the class that allow us to 
calculate important properties like the nuclear repulsion, kinetic energy and so 
on. The commands used are directly implemented from the psi4 package. 
They are listed in Table \ref{tab:commands}

\begin{table}[H]
    \centering
    \begin{tabular}{c|c}

>         command & property \\

Reviewer 2: Typo (Useed) in the caption of this table

\end{python}
 
 
We see that the Fock-matrix uses the density matrix and the electronic 

> repulsion matrix and the Hamiltonian , which the molecule object calls with the 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
repulsion matrix and the Hamiltonian, which the molecule object calls with the 

```

We print out a line that summarises all the relevant values for this iteration. 
We can then move on to the next iterative step until the while loop finds one of 
its conditions is no longer met.

\subsection{On Iterations and the Molecule Object}
\label{subsec: iteration}
In this subsection we will discuss what the iteration actually does to the 

> molecule object allong the way. We call a lot of methods on the object, but those 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
molecule object along the way. We call a lot of methods on the object, but those 

```

    \label{tab:number2}
\end{table}

> \begin{thebibliography}{9}

Reviewer: Use the .bib file for your bibliography
